---
layout: post_page
title: "Quotes"
alias: /q
date: 2014-08-01
wistiaId: 
videoLength: x minutes x seconds
comments: true
excerpt: >
  
summary: |
  
---

Single and double quotes appear frequently when writing code.

However, any quoted text like the `q` element or when using apostropes
we should use smart quotes.

These are often added by the browser, but we can control their
appearance and the choice of character from CSS.

In this episode about we'll learn all about: 

* the difference between dumb quotes and smart quotes
* the different styles of quotes used internationally
* and the somewhat under-used CSS `quotes` property

## Smart or Dumb?

When we create a string of text in a code editor, we use "dumb quotes".

These are either 'single quotes' or "double quotes" and are straight.
The same character is used at the beginning of the string as at the end.

Smart quotes are the correct typographic choice for any quotes or
apostrophes that are displayed in the browser. They are often curly or
sloped and the start and end quotes are both different.

If your document uses the `utf-8` character set you can add smart quotes
directly into the HTML with the following keyboard shortcuts on a Mac:

	‘ ⌥+]
	’ ⌥+⇧+]
	“ ⌥+[
	” ⌥+⇧+[

And on Windows:

	‘ alt+0145
	’ alt+0146
	“ alt+0147
	” alt+0148

Alternatively, the character entities can be used:

	‘ &lsquo;
	’ &rsquo;
	“ &ldquo;
	” &rdquo;

## International Quotes

When researching this episode, it came as a bit of a surprise to me that
there is so much variation in the style of quote marks from country to
country.

English quotes look “like this” - with left and right double (or single)
quotes.

French quotes use right and left «angle quotes».

And »Danish quotes« use the same characters but the other way round.

Bulgarian, Czech, Estonian, Georgian, Icelandic, Russian, Slovak,
Slovene and in Ukrainian quotes use the bottom double quote as the open
quote and the right double quote to close.

Other countries use a combination of these styles and a [table of quote
marks can be found on
Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_variation_in_quotation_marks)

## CSS Quotes

In CSS there's a `quotes` property that allows us to control how the
browser generates quotes for elements like `q` which is for inline
quotations.

{% highlight css %}
q {
	quotes:"“" "”";
}
{% endhighlight %}

The two space separated strings specify the characters to use for the
opening quote and the closing quote mark.

It's possible to use two sets of strings to specify how nested quotes
appear.

{% highlight css %}
q {
	quotes:"“" "”" "‘" "’";
}
{% endhighlight %}

With this snippet, any nested quotes will use single curly quotes
instead of double curly quotes.

> “the quote contained a ‘nested’ quote”

The `q` element will have quote marks generated by the browser but the
`blockquote` element will not. We can add in quotes using pseudo
elements and the `content` property.

{% highlight css %}
blockquote { quotes:"“" "”" "‘" "’"; }
blockquote:before { content:open-quote; }
blockquote:after {  content:close-quote; }
{% endhighlight %}

These can be styles with any other CSS properties to achieve the desired
design result.

Finally, we can combine our knowledge of international quote characters
with CSS by chaning the `quotes` property based on the langauge of the
document or part of the document.

We can do this using the `:lang` pseudo class.

{% highlight css %}
:lang(en) q { quotes: "“" "”"; }
:lang(fr) q { quotes: "«" "»"; }
:lang(pl) q { quotes: "„" "”"; }
{% endhighlight %}

Now by changing the language attribute of the `html` element, our quote
marks are corrected for the corresponding language.

I like the idea of getting subtle details like this right in web design,
I'm sure it's something often overlooked but anything that can be done,
big or small, to improve user experience sounds good to me.


## Outro

A transcript and code snippets for this video can be found in the
shownotes at [atozcss.com/q](http://www.atozcss.com/q).

If you have any questions please leave a comment or, you can tweet me
[@guyroutledge](http://www.twitter.com/guyroutledge) or drop me an
email.

Cheers.
