---
layout: post_page
title: "Sass Partials"
alias: /sass-partials
date: 2015-03-04
wistiaId: efg
comments: true
videoLength: x minutes u seconds
comments: true
excerpt: >
  
summary: |
  
---

Having installed Sass and setup our environment in the previous episode,
we're now ready to take a deep dive in the magical features of Sass.

In this episode we'll look at one simple feature of Sass which goes
a long way to help us better organise and plan the front-end of our
sites.

In this episode we'll learn:

* the number one problem with vanilla CSS projects
* all about Sass partials
* my Sass folder structure 

## CSS Maintainability

In my opinion, the most difficult thing about CSS on a real-world
project is maintaining it. This is exacerbated when dealing with a team
of developers rather than a single person.

I've got a stylesheet here for a recent project of mine. This was
actually generated by Sass but it will serve for demonstration purposes.

This file is over 9000 lines long and contains the CSS for an entire
project. This leads to two big problems.

Firstly, if I want to make a visual change, I have to search through
a huge file. Find and replace will help a lot but there's a good chance
that someone will be lazy and just throw some css at the end of the
file.

The second issue is a much more dangerous one. Let's say there's two
people working on a project and they both need to change some CSS. They
both need to work in the same file. What happens when they both move
a load of stuff around or both change the same line of code?

If the project is version controlled, any conflicts will be caught but
they will need to be resolved (sometimes manually) which is not *always*
a straightforward process and can be fraught with human error. If the
project isn't version controlled, then things can very quickly unravel
and the likelihood of code conflicting or being overwritten is much higher.

Personally, I wouldn't ever want to work on a project that didn't use
a pre-processor or version control ever again!

Sass is a huge help regarding this side of maintainability as we can
split our styles up into many small files and combine them all together
at compile time.

## Partials

In the previous episode we saw the command line `sass` command which
compiled a file named `style.scss` into `style.css`. But with Sass we
can create multiple *partial* files and combine them into one compiled
stylesheet using the Sass `@import` statement.

Partial files are only special in that their file name starts with an
`_` underscore character.

From the previous video, we had a sample project with the following
structure:

	|- css
	   |-- style.css
	   |-- style.css.map
	|- scss
	   |- style.scss

I'm using the `tree` command here to demonstrate this in the terminal
which you can install via [homebrew](http://brew.sh/) - a package manager for OSX.

{% highlight bash %}
brew install tree
{% endhighlight %}

Let's touch a file called `_base.scss` in the `scss` folder and open it
up in a text editor. I'll also run the `sass --watch` command to watch
for changes in our project. 

In every project I tend to have a `_base.scss` partial where I put all
my "sensible default" styles; things like default heading and link
colours, consistent margins and padding for form elements and list
items, that kind of thing.

In our `_base.scss` file, let's add a couple of lines of CSS.

{% hightlight css %}
body {
	font-size:100%;
	font-family: Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
	background:#f1f1f1;
}
h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6, p, li, input {
	margin-bottom:1rem;
}
a {
	color:#cc3f85;
}
a:hover {
	color:#b23430;
}
{% endhighlight %}

You'll notice that Sass hasn't detected any changes to any files it's
watching. And if we open the compiled `style.css` file, we don't see any
of what we've just written.

To make use of these styles, we need to import them into `style.scss`.
We can do that with the `@import` statement followed by the name of the
partial *without* the underscore and file extension.

If we save now, Sass will pick up the change and the CSS will be
compiled.

It's worth noting that you can `@import` a file anywhere within any
other Sass file but I don't tend to import partials into other partials.

This method of splitting up related styles into their own file goes
a long way to solve the maintainability problems mentioned earlier.

## Sass architecture

CSS architecture is a hotly debated topic and much of it also comes down
to personal preference. Over the years I've developed a system that
works for me and I'll go over it here for a point of interest.

I tend to break my `scss` folder into two sub-folders: "includes"
and "global". 

Includes is a folder of Sass partials that generate little
or no CSS rules when compiled. As we've not covered much of this
material yet, I won't go into detail about what that really means.

Global is further divided into four sub-folders.

* Layout
* Components
* Pages

The `layout` folder contains styles for the big-picture layout elements,
often things that are present on multiple (or every) page of a site;
header, footer, sidebar, etc.

The `components` folder contains a series of partials, each with
a single concern. Typically I'll have a partial just for button styles,
one for user avatars, one for modal dialogs etc. Ever component on the
site is split out into its own file and as far as possible, components
should be able to be used anywhere in the site without causing weird
side effects.

Finally, my `pages` folder is for page specific styles these are
typically quite short files as the vast majority of layout and UI is
handled by the base styles and components. 

Every project is different but I've found this folder structure has
served me well across a range of projects from mobile prototypes to
custom Wordpress themes to Ruby on Rails applications.

In the next episode we'll combine this knowledge of partials with Sass
variables and start working towards some more significant examples.

## Outro

A transcript with links and code snippets for this episode can be found
at the shownotes,
[http://www.atozcss.com/sass-intro](http://www.atozcss.com/sass-install).

If you're new round here, why not check out the first 26 episodes in
AtoZ CSS season 1 and if you can't get enough CSS goodness, I have an
ebook all about CSS layout for you at
[atozcss.com/books](http://www.atozcss.com/books).

As always, if you have any questions or comments, you can tweet me
[@guyroutledge](http://www.twitter.com/guyroutledge) or drop me an email 
to [mail@guyroutledge.co.uk](mailto:mail@guyroutledge.co.uk).

