---
layout: blog_page
title: Q&A
alias: /tip-q
category: blog
property: quotes

wistiaId: y3p4f1gz4k
excerpt: >
  There is litterally nothing else to say on the topic of CSS quotes,
  nor is there any other selector, property or value that starts with Q.
  So, in this week's tips I answer some common questions I get from my
  students and fellow professionals.
---

# Your questions answered

<br>
There is litterally nothing else to say on the topic of CSS quotes,
nor is there any other selector, property or value that starts with Q.
So, in this week's tips I answer some common questions I get from my
students, AtoZ supporters and fellow professionals.

## How do you center things vertically in&nbsp;CSS?

I get this one a lot. And I get this one in addition to the more general
question of how to horizontally center things in CSS which I addressed
in [an earlier tip all about floats](/css-tip-f). 

On the topic of vertical centring, some people will tell you it's really
difficult. But these days it doesn't require much CSS and can be done on
any element - even in a responsive project when you don't know how wide
or tall the container or the element to be centred is.

Take the following HTML which marks up a simple modal message box inside
of a container:

{% highlight html %}
<div class="container">

	<div class="modal">
		<h2>Message title</h2>
		<p>Message text lorem ipsum dolor sit amet</p>
	</div>

</div>
{% endhighlight %}

To absolutely center the `.modal` element we can combine absolute
positioning with `translate`.

Step one is to put the top left corner of the box right in the center of
the parent container. Which we can do by offsetting its top and left
edges by 50% of the height and 50% of the width of the parent container:

{% highlight css %}
.container {
	position:relative;
	width:100vw;
	height:100vh;
}
.modal {
	position:absolute;
	top:50%;
	left:50%;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Step two is to bring the element back into the absolute center of the
container. We need to move it back by half of its width and up by half
of its height.

If we know the dimensions of the modal we can acheive this with some
negative margins and divide the width or height by 2 to get the required
value. But if the `.modal` is likely to change size (due to
being sized with percentages for example) this won't work.

Instead, using a translate transformation, we can move the element by
a percentage of its existing size.

{% highlight css %}
.modal {
	position:absolute;
	top:50%;
	left:50%;

	/* back by half its width, up by half its height */
	transform:translate(-50%, -50%); 
}
{% endhighlight %}

And there you have it, the element is perfectly centered even with
a variable size.

## How do you deal with vendor prefixes in&nbsp;CSS?

You may have noticed in the first tip about vertical centring that
I used a `transform` without adding the vendor prefixes. This is for two
reasons. Firstly, it makes tutorial code easier to read and type and
secondly for one little secret: I don't write any vendor prefixes any
more.

I still occasionally find myself at the excellent
[caniuse.com](http://www.caniuse.com) to check on browser support for
various properties and features but these days I don't write any
prefixes in my code.

This is not because I don't care about users of browsers other than the
one I develop in. And it's not because I'm lazy and a bad developer.
I don't write vendor prefixes because I have an automated task that adds
them for me; I never have to think about them again.

I'd highly recommend using a pre-processor to write your CSS (I use Sass
but have also used all the others to try them out) and I'd recommend
adding [Autoprefixer](https://github.com/postcss/autoprefixer) to your
process too. Autoprefixer is a plugin for PostCSS which automatically
adds the necessary prefixes to your compiled CSS based on the data from
caniuse.com.

There are plugins available for all the popular task automators and
I can't recommend it highly enough!

## My CSS isn't working. Can you help?

The short answer is, probably but it's always really hard to debug
someone's code remotely or based on a description of the problem.
Instead, let me outline my process for debugging wonky CSS:

* Check the relevant files are saved
* Check the syntax highlighting in your editor and look for any inconsistencies
* Check for missing quotes, brackets or semi-colons
* Ensure the files I'm editing are what I'm looking at in the browser
* Ensure any paths are correct (for CSS files, images or anything else). You can check to see that all your external files have been loaded correctly in the Network, Sources or Console tabs in your developer tools
* Inspect element and ensure that all classnames have been spelled correctly
* Inspect element and ensure that all CSS properties have been spelled correctly (in Chrome, any invalid properties or values will be marked with an orange alert icon in the elements view)
* Inspect element and play around with values to see what changes

It's likely that you'll have caught the issue by now but if not, some
deeper digging is needed. This may be a good point to ask for help
- either online or in person. If you do ask people for help, make sure
you can send them a link to a [Codepen](http://www.codepen.io) or
JSFiddle of your problem so they can see what you're struggling with.

## Grunt or Gulp?

It took me a while to get on board with [Grunt](http://www.gruntjs.com) but eventually I did. To
start with I didn't really get what it was for but when I realised
I could use it to launch a local server, compile my Sass, compress my
JavaScript and altert me to any syntax errors while I typeed, I was
convinced. It took me a while to get used to but I was happy.

When I heard about [Gulp](http://www.gulpjs.com) (which is a tool that does basically the same
stuff but in a different way) I took the stance of "if it isn't broken,
don't fix it."

But I was wrong.

I recently worked on a client project as part of a team and they were
already using Gulp so I used it too and holy crap IT'S SO FAST!
Compiling Sass used to take many seconds with Grunt but with Gulp we're
talking miliseconds.

I've totally converted and until something better comes along, I'll be
sticking with Gulp.

--

So I hope you found those questions and answers interesting or useful.
If you have any further questions, please don't hesitate to get in touch
and let me know how I can help you.

Cheers.
