---
layout: blog_page
title: Media Queries
alias: /tip-m
category: blog
property: media queries

wistiaId: 85ensigs69
excerpt: >
  Responsive design is going strong and here are 3 quick tips to ensure
  your media queries are as flexible and responsible as possible.
---

I would venture a guess that the vast majority of web designers and
developers are familiar with the concept of responsive design these
days. If not, check out the [media queries
screencast](http://www.atozcss.com/m).

Since responsive design is something so popular, it's a good place to
pick up a couple of tips for improving the way we develop websites and
apps for multiple devices. Here's a couple of #csstips to help you out.
If you have any of your own, [shoot me a tweet
@atozcss](http://www.twitter.com/atozcss) and I'll add them to the list!

## Tip 1: Don't use device specific breakpoints

Hopefully this goes without saying but just in case you need a reminder
or you've not come across this best practice before, I thought it was
worth reiterrating.

Device specific breakpoints are easily identified in your code with
media queries that look like this (comments added for clarity):

{% highlight css %}
/* ipad portrait */
@media screen and ( min-width:768px ) { }

/* ipad landscape */
@media screen and ( min-width:1024px ) { }

/* iphone */
@media screen and ( min-width:320px ) and ( max-width:480px ) { }
{% endhighlight %}

These breakpoints have been set up for Apple devices and have "magic
number" values such as `768px` or `1024px`.

What if a user's window is *1025px* or *1023px*?

The media queries wouldn't take affect and the styles for that device
size would not apply.

Sometimes you may need a very specific value for your breakpoint (more
on that in a second) but seeing these device specific breakpoints is
a code smell as far as I'm concerned.

So what should you do instead?

## Tip 2: Set major *breakpoints* and minor *tweakpoints*

When working on a responsive project, I tend to set arbitrary
whole-number breakpoints that are approximately the dimensions of the
majority of phones, tablets and desktop/laptop devices.

I would tend to use the following major breakpoints (although sometimes
this may be altered on a project by project basis):

{% highlight css %}
/* large phones and small tablets */
@media screen and ( min-width: 500px ) { }

/* tablets and small monitors */
@media screen and ( min-width: 800px ) { }

/* laptops and desktops */
@media screen and ( min-width: 1200px ) { }
{% endhighlight %}

Using these breakpoints doesn't limit the design to only change at these
points but gives a good foundation for working with the 3 major device
types.

For content based tweaking of the design (ie when the content starts to
look broken, unbalanced, or doesn't quite fit) you can then use
tweakpoints to nudge elements around and polish the details of your
project.

{% highlight css %}
/* tweak position of share button */
@media screen and ( min-width: 1150px ) { }
	margin-right: 1em;
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Tip 3: Use `em` or `rem` as your breakpoint units

Instead of `px` use one of these relative units for better scalability
if the user zooms the page or increases the size of the text. As an
example, my major breakpoints above would look as follows when sized in
ems.

{% highlight css %}
/* 500px / 16px = 31.25em */
@media screen and ( min-width: 31.25em ) { }

/* 800px / 16px = 50em */
@media screen and ( min-width: 50em ) { }

/* 1200px / 16px = 75em */
@media screen and ( min-width: 75em ) { }
{% endhighlight %}

If you have any other responsive #csstips do let me know!
