---
layout: blog_page
title: :nth-child
alias: /tip-n
category: blog
property: nth-child

wistiaId: 8effled1nu
excerpt: >
  :nth-child is a pseudo class used to select elements by a numeric
  expression. The syntax is quite different to most other aspects of CSS
  and can be a bit tricky to get your head around to begin with.
---

We have many powerful CSS selectors available for finding elements on
the page and applying styling to them.

The `nth-child` pesudo selector is probably the most powerful due to the
flexibility of its `(an+b)` expression for finding patterns of elements.
This was discussed in detail in the [video screencast all about
nth-child](http://www.atoz.css.com/n). 

In this quick tip, we'll look at when you can/should use `nth-child` and
when you should use a standard class.

## When should I use `nth-child`?

This is a question I get asked by students quite frequently. The first
thing to note is that (unfortunately) it kind of depends on the
situation. But I'll try and provide some good baseline criteria.

Firstly, all the `:nth-child` like selectors are only supported in IE9
and above (with the exception of `:first-child`) so the first thing to
check is the age of browser your project needs to support.

If you need to support IE8 (firstly, sorry to hear that!) then there's
really only one thing you can do; use classes or use `:first-child`.

### Tip 1: Use `:first-child` when supporting&nbsp;IE8

Imagine you have a horizontal unordered list of nav links and your
design needs to have a border to the right of each item - but not the
last item.

Instead of adding the border on the *right* and needing to remove it
from the last one, add the border on the *left* and remove it from the
first one.

{% highlight css %}
.site-nav li {
	border-left: 2px solid grey;
}
.site-nav li:first-child {
	border:0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

You can use a similar trick for borders on top/bottom too.

If you're lucky enough to not need support for IE8, read on... 

### Tip 2: Use `:first-child` and `:last-child` instead of&nbsp;classes

If you're building or using a grid system and need to do something
special for your first and last columns in a row, I'd favour using the
`:first-child` and `:last-child` pseudo classes over adding classes like
`.first` or `.last` direct in the HTML.

This will keep you HTML neater and mean that you don't have to think too
much when crafting your layout. As I say in [my CSS layout
eBook](http://www.atozcss.com/books), "layout is hard" so the less
thinking you have to do about it the better.

### Tip 3: Use `:nth-child` for alternating&nbsp;styles

A classic example of alternating styles would be having different coloured
backgrounds for even or odd rows in a table. Another could be floating
even or odd blocks of content to the left and right side of a page or
container - perhaps for a comment thread or message conversation.

For these kind of situations I use `:nth-child( odd )` and `:nth-child(
even )`. To keep your code lean, you should just write the first state
without any `nth-child` and then use the higher specificity of using
`nth-child` to set up the alternate style.

{% highlight css %}
/* do this */
.data-table tr {
	background: white;
}
.data-table tr:nth-child( even ) {
	background: lightgrey;
}

/* not this */
.data-table tr:nth-child( odd ) {
	background: white;
}
.data-table tr:nth-child( even ) {
	background: lightgrey;
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Tip 4: Avoid weird and complex `nth-child`&nbsp;expressions

For other, more complex selections of the page, I'd favour using classes
direct in the HTML over confusing `nth-child` expressions.

`li:nth-child( -n+3 )` or `li:nth-child( 5n+1 ):not( nth-child( 3n-1) )`
are just a bit too crazy and take a lot of brain power to decipher what
they actually means (hint: I have no idea - I just made the last one up,
although technically it could work!)

Unfortunately, some designs are so complex that often an approach like
this feels necessary but imagine coming back to this kind of code months
later and trying to work out what you were trying to do - it could take
a while even for the most competent of CSS experts!

### Tip 5: Use `nth-child` when you can't control the&nbsp;HTML

This may sound like an odd statement. Surely, as the developer or
designer one of our most important jobs *is* to control the HTML.

The situation I'm talking about here is when you're dealing with
a content management system. 

When building templates for a CMS based website, you'll likely be able
to control the HTML structure and add your classes and data attributes
as and when needed. But sometimes your template will have a place where
it spits out a whole load of content from a text field or textarea from
within the CMS. A classic example is WordPress's `the_content` which is
one big chunck of HTML which you may have little or no control over.

In these casese, the `:first-child`, `:last-child` and `:nth-child`
selectors can get you out of a tight corner.

So, there you have it. 5 tips for using (or not using) one of the most
powerful and flexible CSS selectors there is. If you've got any more
#csstips, do [shoot me a tweet](http://www.twitter.com/atozcss) and I'll
be sure to share them!
