---
layout: blog_page
title: Justify-content
alias: /tip-j
category: blog
property: justify

wistiaId: h307awvs6z
excerpt: >
  There's not much more to say about justified text so in this post
  we'll take a detour into the world of Flexbox and take a look at the
  ways of justifying content.
---

In the [video episode for J](http://www.atozcss.com/j) we discussed the `text-align` property and how it can be used to `justify` text on a page. There's not much more to say about that so let's dig into some flexbox instead!

Flexbox has a `justify-content` property that allows you to position elements within a `flex` container.

Each value of this property defines how the browser will distribute space between and around flex items along the main axis of their parent container.

There are five different values for `justify-content`:

* `flex-start` (default): items are placed at the start of the containing element
* `flex-end` items are at the end of the containing element
* `center` items are centered within the containing element
* `space-between` items are spaced out across the entire width of the containing element, with the first child element at the start and the final child element at the end
* `space-around` items are spaced out with equal space around them, including space at the start and the end.

Have a look at this example to see the different results when you change the value of the `justify-content` property.

<div data-height="268" data-theme-id="17492" data-slug-hash="dYWvZv" data-default-tab="css" data-user="atozcss" class='codepen'><pre><code>.box {
  width: 50px;
  height: 50px;
  border: 1px solid black;
  display: inline-block;
  text-align: center;
  background-color: #66d9ef;
  font-size: 20px;
  line-height: 50px;
  margin: 5px;
}

.flex-item {
  display: flex;
  padding: 2px;
  width: 400px;
  border: 1px solid black;
}

.flex-start {
    justify-content: flex-start;
}
.flex-end {
    justify-content: flex-end;
}
.flex-center {
    justify-content: center;
}
.flex-between {
    justify-content: space-between;
}
.flex-around {
    justify-content: space-around;
}</code></pre>
<p>See the Pen <a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss/pen/dYWvZv/'>dYWvZv</a> by Guy Routledge (<a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss'>@atozcss</a>) on <a href='http://codepen.io'>CodePen</a>.</p>
</div><script async src="//assets.codepen.io/assets/embed/ei.js"></script>
<br>

In case you didn't know already, there's a whole chapter on flexbox in
my <a href="/books">AtoZ CSS Guide to Layout and Document Flow</a> ebook
which you can grab for just $15.  This goes into depth about
`justify-content` and all the other flexbox properties as well as
example usecases and tips for dealing with vendor prefixes.
