---
layout: blog_page
title: Vertical Alignment
alias: /tip-v
category: blog
property: vertical-align

wistiaId: ijork7g838
excerpt: >
  Vertical alignment is tricky business and there are a lot of different
  approaches that work under various different circumstances. In this
  week's tips learn 3 different approaches to vertical centring by using
  line-height, positioning & translate and flexbox and when's best to use
  them.
---

In the original [screencast video for the 
vertical-align property](http://www.atozcss.com/v), we looked at
a couple of methods for vertical centring elements. In this quick tips
series we'll outline three different methods for vertical centring
- something that always used to be quite tricky but now is a breeze to
accomplish.

## Use line-height for simple vertical&nbsp;centring

To vertically center a single line of text or an icon within its
container, we can use the `line-height` property. This property controls
the height of a line in a run of text and adds an equal amount of space
above and below the line-box of inline elements. If the `height` of the
container is known, then setting a `line-height` of the same value will
vertically center the child elements.

{% highlight css %}
.container {
	width:200px;
	height:200px;
	line-height:200px;
}
{% endhighlight %}

For more info on this technique, check out the [AtoZ screencast on
line-height](http://www.atozcss.com/l).


## Use position and transform for flexible vertical centring

The line-height method above is quick and dirty but relies on fixed
heights. I tend to avoid setting `height` explicitly as it can often
restrict the flow of content in a responsive project. This technique is
not flexible enough if you're working with elements of variable or fluid
height.

Instead, we can combine position and translations to vertically center
variable height elements. For example, to vertically center an element
within the whole height of the viewport, we could use the following
snippet:

{% highlight css %}
.container {
	position:relative;
	min-height:100vh;
}
.vertical-center {
	position:absolute;
	top:50%;
	left:50%;
	transform:translate(-50%, -50%);
}
{% endhighlight %}

We first create a positioning context by setting `position:relative` on
a container element. This will then allow us to position the
`.vertical-center` element within its boundaries.

Next, we place the top left corner of the element to be centered in the
exact center of the container by positioning its top edge 50%
away from the top of its parent and 50% away from the left of its
parent.

Finally, the element is nudged back into the center by translating it up
by 50% of its height and left by 50% of its width. Our element is now
vertically and horizontally centered within the container. Because the
placement is done with percentage values that are relative to the size
of the element, if the width or height of the container or child element
changes the element will remain centered.


## Use flexbox for vertical centring

The method above works great for centring elements using traditional box
model and positioning techniques and is very flexible. It will work in
IE9+ but if you only need to support modern browsers or IE10+, you can
achieve the same result with much less code by using [flexbox](http://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox-1/).

Flexbox is a very different way of thinking about layout but one of its
strengths is how it can align elements in horizontal and vertical space.

To center an element using flexbox we can use the following snippet:

{% highlight css %}
.container {
	display:flex;
	justify-content:center;
	align-items:center;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This compact snippet turns our `.container` into a flex container which
automatically turns its child elements into flex items. These flex items
can then be centered horizontally with `justify-content` and vertically
with `align-items`.

There are many more properties and values to the flexbox layout module
which you can read about in my ebook, the [AtoZ CSS Guide to Layout and
Document Flow](http://www.atozcss.com/books) which has a whole chapter
on flexbox as well as covering the fundamental building blocks of
layout, inline elements, block elements, float, positioning, practical
examples and much more!
