---
layout: blog_page
title: CSS tip - H
alias: /tip-h
category: blog
property: hover (and height)

wistiaId: ig3axa1zs3
excerpt: >
  Hover is a pseudo class and can be used to style state. The hover state is 
  active when a users mouse enters the bounding box of an element and is 
  inactive when the users mouse leaves it. In this episode, we’ll look at 
  the :hover pseudo class on text links and create a CSS dropdown menu 
  triggered by hover and enhanced with jQuery for touch devices.
---

There's not too much more I can say about hover that I haven't already covered in the H video.
There are however some really cool animations that you can apply for a hover state.
Google 'css hover effects' and you'll find plenty.
Here's a couple of sites that have some nifty effects:

	http://designshack.net/articles/css/5-cool-css-hover-effects-you-can-copy-and-paste/
	http://tympanus.net/codrops/2012/08/08/circle-hover-effects-with-css-transitions/
	https://css-tricks.com/pop-hovers/

Another CSS H (that I haven't talked about before) is Height.

The height property is used to define the content height on a containing element.
All length units can be used to control height.
If the height of an element is not specifically set it is calculated as the minimum height to hold all the containing elements (corresponding to the default value auto).
It is generally advisable to avoid explicity setting height on any elements as it restricts the flexibility of an element being able to restrict or grow as the contents change.
The only real acceptable place to set an explicit height is for images which tend to have predefined dimensions.

Here's an example that demonstrates the problem with setting a fixed height.

<div data-height="268" data-theme-id="17492" data-slug-hash="pjyPxX" data-default-tab="css" data-user="atozcss" class='codepen'><pre><code>p {
  width: 300px;
  height: 70px;
  padding: 10px; 
  background-color:#66d9ef;  /* blue */
}</code></pre>
<p>See the Pen <a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss/pen/pjyPxX/'>pjyPxX</a> by Guy Routledge (<a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss'>@atozcss</a>) on <a href='http://codepen.io'>CodePen</a>.</p>
</div><script async src="//assets.codepen.io/assets/embed/ei.js"></script>

While the first set of text looks styled correctly, as soon as the text is shorter or longer then the styling no longer looks correct - the containing box appears too big or the text flows outside the box.

The solution to the overflowing text would be to use the overflow property, but this cuts off the text and makes it unreadable.

This situation could be avoided by not specifying height in the first place, or setting it to auto.
