---
layout: blog_page
title: General Sibling
alias: /tip-g
category: blog
property: general sibling

wistiaId: 9d4r1qiqe4
excerpt: >
  General sibling is a little known but very useful CSS selector.
  It allows the styling of an element that is a sibling of another.
  Unfortunately, we can't select previous siblings or parent elements.
  But that is all set to change soon...
---

In the G video we looked at the general sibling selector which allows
styling of a sibling element.  There's also the other child and sibling
selectors for traversing down/across an element tree. 

But what about parent selectors?  Well, despite the multiple use-cases
of needing to select a parent element based on whether it contains
certain children, this feature is not currently available in CSS.

But the good news is that they've made it into the CSS Selectors Level
4 spec. Woo Hoo!  The parent selector, or the *subject* of the selector
as its also called, allows you to select a parent element for styling.
The [latest draft of the spec](http://www.w3.org/TR/selectors4/#subject)
uses an exclamation mark after the given selector to set the subject
element.

The classic example of when you might want to style a parent element is
in a menu.  A navigation menu is normally an unordered list with
a series of list items. Sometimes you may have a sub-menu that may be
shown/hidden as a dropdown.  It has always been tricky to style the
parent list item that has a sub menu without adding a class. With
the new parent selector it's possible to achive without one:

{% highlight css %}

.main-menu li! .sub-menu {
	/* add styles to signify that this item has a submenu */
}

{% endhighlight %}

The Level 4 Selectors spec is still a work in progress and I don't know
of any browser that supports any of it yet. But when it does get
released it will be a wonderful day!
