---
layout: blog_page
title: Browser Support
alias: /tip-s
category: blog
property: supports

wistiaId: 08d1e2yncj
excerpt: >
  This week's tips are all about browser support. Learn what you should
  and shouldn't worry about when designing and building websites as well
  as some details about how CSS is actually read, interpreted and
  rendered when dealing with properties and values it doesn't understand.
---

Keeping track of which browsers support which features is practically
a full-time job. There are great sites out there like
[caniuse.com](http://www.caniuse.com) to keep us in the loop and amazing
automation tools like
[Autoprefixer](https://github.com/postcss/autoprefixer) that mean you'll
never have to write a vendor prefix ever again.

But still, as diligent front-end developers and designers, we need to
ensure that our content is accessible to as many users as possible and
even if they don't get the super fancy version, they can still consume
the content and get to the information they need.

This series of quick tips will suggest areas that you don't need to fret
about (for the most part) whilst still ensuring that your projects work
across a wide range of browsers and devices.

## Don't worry about animations and transitions

For the most part animations and transitions should be subtle effects to
make the content stand out more, direct the users attention or add a bit
of personality and character to a page. If animations or transitions
aren't supported in a particular browser, the elements will just remain
static or snap between states on hover of focus.

As long as the initial state of the animation isn't positioning an
element off screen or making it invisible (eg. by setting `opacity:0`)
then the fact that the element wont't move in an old browser doesn't
really matter.

In the case of animations, you could try and provide a fallback using
JavaScript but I'd really have to think hard about whether the extra
effort, extra code and extra maintenance is worth the hassle.

## Don't worry about subtle transformations

In a similar vein to the comments about animations and transitions, I'd
also not stress too much about making subtle effects like rotations or
skews work across every device either.

{% highlight css %}
.wonky-image {
	transform: rotate( 2deg );
}
{% endhighlight %}

If a device supports `transform` and you add a small rotation to an
image to inspire a carefree and relaxed style that's great. Does
it really matter if a user with an old browser sees a straight image?
Probably not. We should spend our time solving more relevant problems
than trying to make every page look identical in every browser.

## Don't worry about semi-transparent colours

Based on the previous tips you are probably starting to get the picture
that it's not worth worrying about making every last visual detail work
on every type of device or browser. Good. It's more about the experience
as a whole and about enhancing that experience for those with more
modern capabilities.

[Progressive enhancement](http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2009/04/progressive-enhancement-what-it-is-and-how-to-use-it/) 
means providing a good base experience for
everyone and then enhancing that experience where appropriate and where
possible.

In the case of animations or transformations there isn't really any
alternative - although you could maybe use a GIF for an animation
depending on the circumstances. However, in some cases lack of support
means nothing shows up on the page. If you have to support IE8, this is
certainly the case for semi-transparent colours.

Fortunately, due to the way CSS handles properties or values it doesn't
understand, a simple fallback solution can be provided.

If you want to add a semi-transparent red to the background of an
element, you can first declare a solid colour and then override that
with the semi-transparent one.

{% highlight css %}
.box {
	background:red;
	background:rgba( 255, 0, 0, 0.5 );
}
{% endhighlight %}

Old browsers will see the first declaration and "understand" the value
of `red`. They'll then see the next declaration (which should override
the first) but see a value they don't understand. This makes the second
declaration of `background` invalid, leaving the background painted red.

Modern browsers will see the first `background` declaration and then the
second just beneath. If the browser knows what `rgba( )` is, it will
paint the semi-transparent colour and override the first.

This technique can be used with transparent colours, gradients, rounded
corners, using `rem` values and lots more so is a handy concept to
grasp.

## What should I worry about then?

It may sound like I'm dismissing the need to think about browser
support but I'm not. I'm suggesting that visual flair doesn't
(necessarily) need to look and work exactly the same way in every
browser or on every device.

There are three things that I *would* spend time worrying about, having
freed up a load of time by not worrying about the above. Do worry about:

* Layout
* Legibility
* and Performance

Layout is key to a user being able to navigate your site, use your app
or consume your content. Ensure that the techniques you've used for
layout do work in all the browsers you need to support.

Legibility is incredibly important. I was recently trying to read an
article that we set in a very fine medium-grey font on a light grey
background. I had to fiddle around in the developer tools to increase
the contrast just so I could read the content!

Performance of your site is also incredibly important. This is a huge
topic which I'm not going to try and sum up in a single paragraph but in
relation to our topic of browser support, don't try and polyfill
functionality or add a whole heap of animation and effects with JS at
the expense of performance. Many of the old browsers that you're trying
to patch with extra code are already clunky and slow at parsing scripts, 
so adding more is just a recipe for disaster.

Instead, leverage progressive enhancement and start with a good baseline
experience for as many people and as many devices as possible within the
constraints of the project. Then enhance that base experience with all
the bells and whistles to really make your work shine.
