---
layout: blog_page
title: Opacity
alias: /tip-o
category: blog
property: opacity

wistiaId: 1lm6l98v58
excerpt: >
  Opacity can be used to make elements semi-transparent but there are
  a couple of gotchas to watch out for. We can also use opacity to
  create fading effects that used to only be possibly with JavaScript
  libraries. Find out how in this series of quick tips.
---

We can use `opacity` to contol the visibility of elements on the page
- anything from completely transparent to completely opaque as discussed
in [the original screencast video](http://www.atozcss.com/o).

Here's a couple of tips when using `opacity` to ensure the right parts
of the element are semin-transparent and to demonstrate how we can
create fading effects without relying on JavaScript effects libraries.

## Tip 1: Opacity applies to the whole element

When setting `opacity` on an element, the whole element, including its
children are made semi-transparent. The `opacity` is not *inherited* by
the children so unfortunately you can't set `opacity:1` on them to make
them fully opaque again.

If you want to have the background of an element semi-transparent but
want the child elements (eg text or images) to be opaque, use
a semi-transparent `background` instead of using `opacity`. 

{% highlight css %}
.module {
	background: rgba( 255, 255, 255, 0.5 ); /* semi-trans white */
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Tip 2: Opacity affects stacking context

When setting opactiy to a value less than `1` the element is placed on
a new layer so the background can be shown beneath the semi-transparent
element. This is similar to how `z-index` works and, just like
`z-index`, using `opacity` creates a new stacking context.

For more info on stacking contexts and how they interact with `z-index`
check out the [AtoZ CSS Episode 26](http://www.atozcss.com/z).

## Tip 3: Create fade effects without jQuery

I'll preface this with a disclaimer: I like jQuery and use it a lot - on
almost every project I work on. What I'm talking about here is not
abandoning jQuery (although you don't really *need* it in this case) but
using native CSS functionality instead of leaning on JS for effects.

We can create fade in and fade out effects quite simply by combining
`opacity`, `transition` and possibly some JS class switching.

To outline the scenario, imagine a situation where clicking a button
fades in a modal window to display some additional content. This modal
content could be hidden when the page loads and then displayed using
jQuery's `fadeIn()` method.

{% highlight javascript %}
$( '.show-modal-button' ).on( 'click', function( e ){

	e.preventDefault();
	$( '.modal' ).fadeIn();

});
{% endhighlight %}

This will use JavaScript to animate the element from `display:none` to
`display:block` by injecting inline styles. 

I tend to avoid having inline styles injected unnecessarily and we can
actually perform the same effect by setting up "state" classes in our
CSS - one for the visible state and one for the invisible state - apply
a transition to the element we want to fade and then toggle the different
states using simple class switching. You could use a CSS pseudo state
like `:hover` or `:focus` if you wanted to keep the effect purely CSS.

First we set up the states in the CSS. I use a naming convention prefix
of `is-` to demonstrate that the class is a state triggered by JS.

{% highlight css %}
.modal {
	/* other styles for modal */
	transition: opacity 1s ease;
}
.modal.is-visible {
	opacity:1;
}
.modal.is-hidden {
	opacity:0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

We can now toggle the states by dynamically adding or removing classes in
JS (assuming that you start with the class `is-hidden` in the HTML):

{% highlight javascript %}
$( '.show-modal-button' ).on( 'click', function( e ){

	// turn off the is-hidden class and turn on the is-visible class
	$( '.modal' ).toggleClass( 'is-hidden is-visible' );

});
{% endhighlight %}

So there you have it, 3 quick tips about the `opacity` property. 

The one I'd encourage you to use the most is leveraging CSS for your
effects over using JavaScript. I find I have much more control of the
animations and transitions and you can pull off some pretty fancy
effects without lines and lines of jQuery animation callbacks.

I hope you found these tips useful. Do let me know if you have any to
add...
