---
layout: blog_page
title: Translate vs Position
alias: /tip-x
category: blog
property: translateX

wistiaId: jvizea6q0i
excerpt: >
  There are often many ways of doing the same thing in CSS. One of those
  cases is when placing elements with position:relative or
  transform:translate(). In this tip we'll look at the difference
  between the two and how they can be combined to achieve some
  interesting results.
---

There are a number of CSS properties for placing elements on the page.
These include big-picture layout properties like `float`, `margin` and `padding` and
more fine-grained tools like `position` and `translate()`.

On the surface, `position:relative` and `transform:translate()` seem to
work in quite a similar way but there are some subtle differences which
are important to grasp so we choose the right tool for the job.

## What's the difference between translate and position relative?

In this post we'll look at a number of differences between these methods
for element placement but first, let me clarify what these various
properties do.

If we set `position:relative` on an element we can use it to create
a boundary for *absolutely* positioning elements within. This is
probably the more common use of relative position but it's *not* the use
that we're discussing here.

If we combine `position:relative` with one of the offset properties
`top`, `bottom`, `left` or `right` the element will be moved from its
original place in the layout whilst preserving the space in the document
it once occupied. The element will be moved on to a new layer and its
"layer order" or its stacking order can then be controlled with the
`z-index` property.

{% highlight css %}
.thing {
	position:relative;
	top:100px;
	left:50px;
}
{% endhighlight %}

In the above example the element will be moved 100px away from the top
and 50px away from the left of its original position.

When using `transform:translate( x, y )` we get a very similar visual
result to using relative position. The same result as above could be
achieved with the following snippet:

{% highlight css %}
.thing {
	transform:translate( 100px, 50px );
}
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, we're translating the co-ordinates of the element by 100px
along the x-axis and 50px along the y-axis. The end result is visually
the same as the previous position example.

So, why do we have two ways of doing the same thing? Well, there *are*
some differences between these approaches...

## Browser support

`position` is a CSS2 property whereas `transform` is a CSS3 property.
There are differences in browser support as a result although really the
only browsers that don't support 2D transforms are IE8 and below. 

If you need to support old versions of IE, `transform` won't be an
option for you.

## GPU Acceleration

The `transform` property will use hardware acceleration where possible
so using `translate()` over `position` will see performance
benefits if any animations or transitions are also being used on the
element.

If you want to move an element as part of a transition or keyframe
animation, favour using translate rather than positioning (this goes for
both absolute and relative positioning). For more depth on this,
including an explanation and performance profiling, check out [this
video from Paul Irish](http://www.paulirish.com/2012/why-moving-elements-with-translate-is-better-than-posabs-topleft/).

## Percentage based values behave differently

One major difference between these two methods of placing elements is
how they respond to percentage based values.

Take the following markup and styles:

{% highlight html %}
<div class="box position"></div>
<div class="box transform"></div>
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight css %}
.box {
	width:200px;
	height:200px;
}
.position {
	position:relative;
	left:50%;
	background:red;
}
.transform {
	transform:translateX(50%);
	background:blue;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Both elements have been given an offset from their left edge of `50%`.

The left edge of the red box will be 50% away from the edge of its
parent container.

The left edge of the blue box will be 100px away from the left edge of
its parent container. This distance is because 50% of 200px is 100px.

When setting percentage values with translate, the percentage is
measured as a percentage of the elements computed width or height. 

<p data-height="268" data-theme-id="17492" data-slug-hash="MKpYLV" data-default-tab="result" data-user="atozcss" class='codepen'>See the Pen <a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss/pen/MKpYLV/'>MKpYLV</a> by Guy Routledge (<a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss'>@atozcss</a>) on <a href='http://codepen.io'>CodePen</a>.</p>
<script async src="//assets.codepen.io/assets/embed/ei.js"></script>
<br>

## Combine position and translate together

One final point to make is that because `position` and `transform` are
two different properties, we can combine them together. This allows us
to combine absolute positioning to place an element in a very specific
place on the page and then modify that position with `transform`.

An example of this could be to have a positioned element animate up and
down or left and right. Or we can [combine positioning with translate to
achieve flexible vertical centring](http://www.atozcss.com/css-tip-v).

So while these two methods of placing elements can be used to achieve
similar results, there are some significant differences and combining
the strengths of each approach makes them a really powerful set of
tools.
