---
layout: blog_page
title: CSS tip - I
alias: /tip-i
category: blog
property: id

wistiaId: q9m9d0n2hl
excerpt: >
  ID is a CSS selector that allows the styling of a single unique element. 
  Their use in CSS is common and often a little controversial. In this 
  video, I will outline some of the reasons why I prefer the `class`
  selector over `ID`, how CSS specificity works.  
---

In the [I video](http://www.atozcss.com/i) I talked about ID and how it can be used.  
I also had a good rant about the issues with using id over class, both in terms of reusability and selectivity.
To balance the scales a little I should talk about when we should use ID and why.

1. To provide a unique hook for Javascript

This is a little outside the normal scope of CSS but its a useful piece of knowledge none the less.
In order for JavaScript to interact with an element on a web page, the relevant element needs to be identified with and id. JavaScript events and responses are then defined on certain actions on those elements.

1. To provide targeted anchor tags for navigation

IDs can be used on a single page for navigation by setting the href in an anchor tag to the id.
Check out this example that allows you to navigate easily to different chapters on the page.

<div data-height="268" data-theme-id="17492" data-slug-hash="VvKeKV" data-default-tab="css" data-user="atozcss" class='codepen'><pre><code>a {
  text-decoration: none;
}
li {
  display: inline-block;
  list-style: none; 
  padding: 10px;
}</code></pre>
<p>See the Pen <a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss/pen/VvKeKV/'>VvKeKV</a> by Guy Routledge (<a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss'>@atozcss</a>) on <a href='http://codepen.io'>CodePen</a>.</p>
</div><script async src="//assets.codepen.io/assets/embed/ei.js"></script>


1. For truly unique elements in CSS

The most common example are form elements where you use an id to identify a single label or input.

And here's a few more interesting tips about using IDs:

* a valid id cannot start with a number and must be at least one character long
* id selectors are case-sensitive across HTML, CSS and JavaScript
