---
layout: blog_page
title: Widows and Line&nbsp;Breaks
alias: /tip-w
category: blog
property: widows

wistiaId: w6czfxn0k9
excerpt: >
  This week's quick tips are all about when and when not to use break tags
  and how to solve the typographic travesty that is a lone word at the end
  of a heading or paragraph.
---

A *widow* is a term used to describe a lone word at the end of
a paragraph or headline.

These lone words occur when the last word in a line of text wraps on to
a new line due to a lack of available width.

It's more visually pleasing to have at least two words on a line and
these widows are often seen as undesirable. An agency that I used to
work at was so anal about them that I've become a bit OCD about ensuring
they are nowhere to be seen - not so much in paragraphs of text but
certainly in headings as far as possible.

Here are some tips for removing widows and working with line breaks.

## Avoid using `<br>` tags to force line&nbsp;breaks.

We can force a line break and ensure text wraps in a pleasing way by
adding a break tag into the HTML document.

{% highlight html %}
<h1>
	This is a long title which should<br>
	wrap here
</h1>
{% endhighlight %}

This might look fine on a wide screen device but if the screen is
narrow, the line break may come at the wrong point, leaving the text
looking broken. For example:

	This is a long title which
	should
	wrap here
	 

This could happen if the available width would only fit the string
`"This is a long title which"`. The word "should" would then wrap
naturally and then the forced `<br>` would cause "wrap here" to be on
its own line. 

Not very nice.

## Don't use `<br>` tags for&nbsp;spacing

This is something I see very new students doing a lot. They've just
learned HTML and want to start spacing things out from each other; more
spacing above headings, more spacing between sections or paragraphs etc. 

This can be done with `<br>` tags by manually adding empty lines but
spacing should always be handled by CSS. The `margin` property gives you
much more control than adding line breaks with `<br>` tags and HTML is
for content, not for styling.

## When can I use `<br>`&nbsp;tags?

Generally speaking, I try and avoid using `<br>` tags as much as
possible. 

Really the only times I do use line breaks is when marking up
poetry (although `<pre>` tags would probably be more preferable here to
preserve all line breaks and indentations). The other place is when
marking up mailing addresses.

I've also been known to use them in a paragraph in a website footer for
a quick and dirty approach to adding copyright info.

{% highlight html %}
<footer class="site-footer">
	<p>
		Lovingly created by Guy Routledge<br>
		&copy; 2016 All Rights Reserved
	</p>
</footer>
{% endhighlight %}

Does this break my rule about not using line breaks for styling?
Perhaps. I'll tell myself off.

## Hide line breaks with&nbsp;`display:none`

A `<br>` tag doesn't do a huge amount (other than force a line break)
and doesn't have any visual characteristics - you can't see them, they
don't have any shape or size or colour or anything like that.

However, you can add a class to one and toggle it's ability to break
lines with the `display` property.

Setting `display:none` will not cause a line break. Setting
`display:block` will cause a line break. This can occassionally be
useful when combined with media queries to turn breaking on and off
at certain screen sizes.

{% highlight html %}
<p>
	Lovingly created by Guy Routledge

	<br class="break-large">

	&copy; 2016 All Rights Reserved
</p>
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight css %}
.break-large {
	display:none;
}
@media screen and (min-width:1000px) {
	.break-large {
		display:block;
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}

These snippets will allow the text to flow as a single line on narrow
screen devices but for large screens, the break will be visible and the
copyright text will be on two lines.

## Use `&nbsp;` for flexibly removing&nbsp;widows

Circling back to where we started this post, if we shouldn't use `<br>`
tags to force line breaks (and remove ugly widow words) then what should
we use?

Well joining the last two words in a heading with a non-breaking space
character is a much more flexible way of ensuring text flows and wraps
in a visually pleasing way. Take the following markup:

{% highlight html %}
<h1>
	This is a long title which wraps&nbsp;here
</h1>
{% endhighlight %}

I've added a non-breaking space between the words "wraps" and "here"
which makes them behave as if they are a single word, rather than two
that are separated by a space.

If the screen is wide and there's enough space for the whole heading to
display in a single line, everything looks fine.

If the screen width is reduced, the first available wrap point is
between the string "which" and the string "wraps&nbsp;here". This means
that if there isn't enough space for the whole heading to fit on
a single line, the line will break on to two lines, leaving the last two
words on their own. No widows and everything looks great.

If you want to see this technique in action, you can use your browser's
developer tools to inspect the headings on this page. You could also try
resizing the window to see how the words in each heading break.

If you're enjoying these tips please do let me know [via
Twitter](http://www.twitter.com/atozcss). I'm also planning
a number of video series and more in-depth material for the rest of the
year. 

[What topics would you like to see covered in
future?](http://www.twitter.com/atozcss)
