---
layout: blog_page
title: CSS tip - Y
alias: /tip-y
category: blog
property: rotateY

wistiaId: k8pabgcyg8
excerpt: >
  In the previous episode we learned about the transform property and the
  value translateX().

  In this episode we'll be digging deeper into transforms and manipulating
  elements in 3D. 
---

We can perform all sorts of interesting transformations on elements
along various different axis. In this tip, we'll provide a rundown of
all the common options and then look at a lesser known value of
transform which allows us to set multiple transforms via the `matrix()` value.

## Transform along the y-axis

Since the original screencast focused around `rotateY()`, I thought it
would be useful to look at all other other available transformations
that happen along the vertical y-axis.

We can apply the following transformations:

* `transform: translateY( 100px )`
* `transform: rotateY( 45deg )`
* `transform: scaleY( 1.5 )`
* `transform: skewY( 30deg )`

These values are all limited to the y-axis and can be used to
communicate intent that only transformation along this single axis is
being performed.

`rotateY()` is the only one of these values that performs a 3D
transformation, where the element is rotated around the y-axis. If
performing any kind of 3D transform, be sure to set
`transform-style:preserve-3d` on the parent element.

## Multiple transforms

If you want to combine multiple transforms together, this can be done by
space separating the different transformation functions. The following
snippet combines a translation with a skew for example:

{% highlight css %}
.element {
	transform: translateY( 50px ) skew( 30deg );
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is all well and good but if you are setting multiple transforms
like this as part of an animation or transition, it can be quite fiddly
as each part of the transform needs to be addressed in each state or
each keyframe.

There is a slightly more complex but much more powerful method for
setting transforms via the `matrix()` value.

## Set complex transforms with a `matrix()`

The `matrix()` is a single value that allows you to set `scale`, `skew`
and `translate` in one go by passing 6 numeric parameters.

{% highlight css %}
.element {
	transform: matrix( a, b, c, d, e, f );
}
{% endhighlight %}

At the heart of this technique is some pretty complex maths which has
always hurt my brain to try and figure out. So instead of me trying to
explain mathematical matrices, dot products and vectors, let's
have a look at what each of the parameters in the `matrix()` refer to.

If you do want a full on deep dive into the maths, have a read of this
article by [User Agent Man](http://www.useragentman.com/blog/2011/01/07/css3-matrix-transform-for-the-mathematically-challenged/).

In the above snippet, I've labeled each argument to the matrix function
with a different letter from `a` to `f`.

`a` and `d` are used to set the horizontal and vertical scale.

`b` and `c` are used to set the amount of horizontal and vertical skew. 

Finally, `e` and `f` are for setting the horizontal and vertical translation.

One thing that makes this whole `matrix()` thing a bit hard to grasp is
that each argument is provided as a number value rather than a length.
Lengths are values like `100px` or `30deg` but these aren't valid values
for a matrix and we need to use numbers instead.

To demonstrate this, the snippet below produces two identical visual
results; one using multiple transforms and on with a single matrix:

{% highlight css %}
.one {
	transform:scale( 1.5, 1.5) skew( 10deg, 10deg) translate( 100px, -50px );
}
.two {
	transform:matrix(1.5, 0.26449, 0.26449, 1.5, 136.775, -48.551);
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here's a Codepen of the above snippet so you can see the identical
result:

<p data-height="268" data-theme-id="17492" data-slug-hash="MKpwLR" data-default-tab="result" data-user="atozcss" class='codepen'>See the Pen <a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss/pen/MKpwLR/'>MKpwLR</a> by Guy Routledge (<a href='http://codepen.io/atozcss'>@atozcss</a>) on <a href='http://codepen.io'>CodePen</a>.</p>
<script async src="//assets.codepen.io/assets/embed/ei.js"></script>
<br>

As much as the `matrix` value is useful for setting many values in one
go, it's not particularly human readable. It's great if you're doing
a lot of JavaScript maths to work out all the various component parts of
the matrix but it's very confusing to write by hand.

If you want to dig into matrices further then you can Inspect Element on
any element that's been transformed and look at the "computed styles"
tab.  The matrix for the transform being applied will be shown in full.
