## Unit Functions in Sass

In a previous video about creating custom functions in Sass, we created
a function that converted pixel values to rem values by manipulating
their units.

We can create our own functions for all sorts of applications in Sass
but there are also a number of functions built into the Sass library
which we can leverage to make our functions, mixins, loops and logic
more robust and more comprehensive.

In this video we're going to look at a couple of unit functions from the
Sass library and show how they can be used to enhance our typographic
functions from the previous video.


## Converting Units

In the [Creating Custom Functions](#) video we created a custom 
`px-to-rem` function that - perhaps unsurprisingly - converts a pixel
value into a `rem` value.

We started by returning the result of dividing a pixel value by the base
font size and then multiplying by 1rem.

	$base-font-size: 16px;

	@function px-to-rem( $value ) {
		@return ( $value / $base-font-size ) * 1rem;
	}

We then made this function slightly more flexible by accommodating pixel
values or plain numbers passes as arguments to the function by first
running it through a function that strips the units.

	@function strip-units( $length ) {
		@return $length / ( ( $length * 0 ) + 1 );
	}
	@function px-to-rem( $value ) {
		$value: strip-units( $value );
		$base-font-size: strip-units( $base-font-size );

		@return ( $value / $base-font-size ) * 1rem;
	}

This is a fairly comprehensive function - and it works - but we can
leverage a couple of additional Sass functions to make it even more
robust and handle even more use cases.


## The Unitless Function

Let's first take a look at the `unitless` function. This is a built-in
Sass function that returns `true` or `false` depending on whether
a value has units.

If we take a look at the 
[Sass Function Reference for unitless](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/Sass/Script/Functions.html#unitless-instance_method)
we'll see a description of the function and a couple of examples of its
use.

If we call `unitless` and pass in the value `100` the function
returns `true` because `100` has no units - ie. it is unitless.

If we call `unitless` and pass in the value `100px` the function returns
`false` because `100px` does have units - ie. it's not unitless.

The function will also handle errors and raise an argument error if we
try to pass anything other than a number into the function.

So that's how the unitless function works but how would this be useful
to us and our `px-to-rem` function?

Well, currently our function strips units from any value passed in and
then converts the result into rems. But if we pass in a plain number
value then we don't need to remove any units (because it doesn't have
any).

	
	@function px-to-rem( $value ) {
		@if not unitless( $value ) {
			$value: strip-units( $value );
		}
		$base-font-size: strip-units( $base-font-size );

		@return ( $value / $base-font-size ) * 1rem;
	}

So we can modify our function to check if the value pass in is unitless
or not. If it is, we can go ahead and convert it to rems. If not, we can
first strip the units and then convert to rems.


## The Unit Function

Another useful Sass function for working with units is the `unit()`
function. This can help us when we need to perform different
functionality depending on what type of unit a value has.

As we did last time, let's have a look at the Sass Function Reference
for the [unit function](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/Sass/Script/Functions.html#unit-instance_method).

This function returns a string containing the unit associated with
a number. If we call the `unit` function and pass in `100` the result is
an empty string. If we call the function with `100px` the result is `"px"`.
If we pass a mathematical expression to the unit function we get
a complex unit.

We can use this `unit` function in a similar way to our `px-to-rem`
function but with a slightly different use case.

Instead of converting numbers into `rem` values for use in font-sizes,
paddings, margins etc. we can create a function that converts length
values into `em` for use in media query breakpoints. This is often
a desirable way to write your media queries so they apply as the size of
the text changes as well as when other factors like browser width and
height change.

Let's create a functions called `bp-to-em` which converts flexible
values to `em` for use in breakpoints. This and the `px-to-rem` function
are inspired by similar functionality baked into Zurb's Foundation
framework.

	@function bp-to-em( $value ) {
		@if unit( $value ) == 'px' or unitless( $value ) {
			$value: px-to-rem( $value );
		}
		@return strip-units( $value ) * 1em;
	}

	@media screen and ( max-width: bp-to-em( 300px ) ) {
		body { background:red }
	}

Our `bp-to-em` function takes one argument: the value we want to
convert.

The first thing we do is check what units this value has. If it has `px`
units or has no units at all, we can modify our value and convert it to
rems using our existing function.

Otherwise, if we pass in any other kind of value we'll strip the units
and then multiply by `1em` to convert the number to `em`.

We can then use this function within our media queries and any unitless
or pixel value will be converted to a relative `em` unit.

There are a number of functions like `unit` and `unitless` built into
the Sass libarry and combining them together with custom functions and
if/else logic like this can be a powerful way of creating your own
library of helper functions for use across your projects.

If you're interested in a handful of other U-functions have a search
through the [Sass Function Reference](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/Sass/Script/Functions.html)
for `unquote` and `unique_id` and see what else you can do!
