# The Sass Random Function

In this series we've looked at all the fundamental, powerful features of
Sass from variables and nesting to functions and flow control.

Further to these features, Sass has a whole host of useful functions and
utilities which turns CSS from a purely declarative language into
something more like a scripting language.

In this short episode we're going to look at one such feature and some
practical applications: the Sass `random()` function.


## How Random

Many programming languages have the ability to generate random numbers.
These are useful for building games, generating dummy data or creating
algorithms.

Sass is a slightly special case because even though it can generate
a random number at compile time, this number will remain constant until
the styles are recompiled again.

To illustrate this, let's take a look at using the `random` function in
a simple example.

I've got a box here with a minimum width and height so we can see
something on the rendered page to the left.

Using `random`, let's generate some random dimensions for the box.

	.box {
		min-width:50px;
		min-height:50px;

		width: random(500) * 1px;
		height: random(500) * 1px;
	}

The random function takes a single argument for the upper limit of the
random number to be generated. When using this function, the lower limit
is always 1.

If we save this code and compile, we'll see the randomly generated
dimensions for the box. If I refresh the page... the dimensions remain
exactly the same.

This is because the random number is only generated at compile time.

If I force the code to recompile by saving... two new numbers are
generated and the box dimensions change once more.


## Practical Use Cases

This functino is simple to use but how likely is it that you'll ever
need to generate a random number in CSS?

In the past I've used this for generating random colours for a grid of
boxes when prototyping an image grid layout. Instead of searching for or
creating a whole series of different images, I used Sass to generate
a whole host of different *coloured* boxes.

Combining a `@for` loop with `rgb` backgrounds, each with a random
number from 1 to 255, provides some interesting effects.

	@for $i from 1 through 100 {
		.box:nth-child( #{ $i } ) {
			background-color: rgb( random( 255 ), random( 255 ), random( 255 ) );
		}
	}

Another potential usecase that I discovered recently is creating
particle effects.

https://css-tricks.com/animate-different-end-states-using-one-set-css-keyframes/

This uses the `random` function to randomise the starting position of a series of
particles and then animate them with random animation duration and
animation delay to create a very impressive effect.


## Wrap up

While the random function might not feature in every one of your future
projects, it's a really useful tool to keep in your Sass toolbox.
